README.md, before:

# GraphQL Composite Schemas Working Group

This working group is a subcommittee of the
[GraphQL Working Group](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg) with the
following primary purpose:

> To build a specification that covers many of the shared concerns when building
> a larger GraphQL schema as a composite of many smaller GraphQL schemas.

Anyone in the public GraphQL community may attend a meeting of this
subcommittee, provided they first sign the
[Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/tree/main/membership)
or belong to an organization which has signed.

This repository holds [agendas](./agendas) and [notes](./notes) for all meetings
past and upcoming as well as [shared RFC documents](./rfcs). Anyone may edit an
upcoming event's agenda to _attend_ or _propose an agenda item_.

All meetings occur via video conference, however participating company offices
are welcome to host guests.

Meetings are typically scheduled at 1500 UTC on the 2nd Thursday of the month.
Check the [agendas](./agendas) for the exact date and time of upcoming meetings.

Keep track of future upcoming meetings by subscribing to the
[Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar?cid=bGludXhmb3VuZGF0aW9uLm9yZ19pazc5dDl1dWoycDMyaTNyMjAzZGd2NW1vOEBncm91cC5jYWxlbmRhci5nb29nbGUuY29t)
or
[ical file](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/ical/linuxfoundation.org_ik79t9uuj2p32i3r203dgv5mo8%40group.calendar.google.com/public/basic.ics).
(maintained in UTC because time zones are hard).

To create the agenda files for a given month YYYY/MM, run the following command:

```
yarn && yarn gen-agenda YYYY MM
```

### Joining a meeting?

To request participation in an upcoming meeting, please send a pull request by
editing the relevant [meeting agenda](./agendas).

### Want to help us keep up?

We're always looking for volunteers to help take notes from the meetings, the
results of which are shared in [`notes/`](./notes). If you're interested in
taking notes, sign up for a meeting in [`agendas/`](./agendas) and indicate that
you're willing to be a note taker.

## Participation guidelines

Meetings with many participants, especially over video, can easily get hard to
follow or run off course. When we talk about issues we care about, it's easy to
get into heated debate. In order to respect everyone's time, and arrive to
worthwhile outcomes, this subcommittee follows the
["Participation guidelines" in the GraphQL Working Group](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/README.md#participation-guidelines);
a summary of which is:

- Participate
- Don't talk too much
- Volunteer to take notes
- Have an outcome in mind
- Contribute
- Choose your battles
- Champion alternatives
- Block progress as a last resort
- Be patient and persistent

## Contributing to this repo

This repository is managed by EasyCLA. Project participants must sign the free
([GraphQL Specification Membership agreement](https://preview-spec-membership.graphql.org)
before making a contribution. You only need to do this one time, and it can be
signed by
[individual contributors](http://individual-spec-membership.graphql.org/) or
their [employers](http://corporate-spec-membership.graphql.org/).

To initiate the signature process please open a PR against this repo. The
EasyCLA bot will block the merge if we still need a membership agreement from
you.

You can find
[detailed information here](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/tree/main/membership).
If you have issues, please email
[operations@graphql.org](mailto:operations@graphql.org).

### Commit access

Commit access is granted to this repo to members of the
[GraphQL TSC](./GraphQL-TSC.md) and some regular attendees of subcommittee
meetings. To request commit access, please reach out to a TSC member.

Commit message:

Update README with link to spec repo
Add link to where spec discussions are happening. Maybe in the future we can consider merging into one

README.md, after:

# GraphQL Composite Schemas Working Group

This working group is a subcommittee of the
[GraphQL Working Group](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg) with the
following primary purpose:

> To build a specification that covers many of the shared concerns when building
> a larger GraphQL schema as a composite of many smaller GraphQL schemas.

Anyone in the public GraphQL community may attend a meeting of this
subcommittee, provided they first sign the
[Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/tree/main/membership)
or belong to an organization which has signed.

This repository holds [agendas](./agendas) and [notes](./notes) for all meetings
past and upcoming as well as [shared RFC documents](./rfcs). Anyone may edit an
upcoming event's agenda to _attend_ or _propose an agenda item_.

The results of this subcommittee being collaborated on in a separate spec repo: [graphql/composite-schemas-spec](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-spec).

All meetings occur via video conference, however participating company offices
are welcome to host guests.

Meetings are typically scheduled at 1500 UTC on the 2nd Thursday of the month.
Check the [agendas](./agendas) for the exact date and time of upcoming meetings.

Keep track of future upcoming meetings by subscribing to the
[Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar?cid=bGludXhmb3VuZGF0aW9uLm9yZ19pazc5dDl1dWoycDMyaTNyMjAzZGd2NW1vOEBncm91cC5jYWxlbmRhci5nb29nbGUuY29t)
or
[ical file](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/ical/linuxfoundation.org_ik79t9uuj2p32i3r203dgv5mo8%40group.calendar.google.com/public/basic.ics).
(maintained in UTC because time zones are hard).

To create the agenda files for a given month YYYY/MM, run the following command:

```
yarn && yarn gen-agenda YYYY MM
```

### Joining a meeting?

To request participation in an upcoming meeting, please send a pull request by
editing the relevant [meeting agenda](./agendas).

### Want to help us keep up?

We're always looking for volunteers to help take notes from the meetings, the
results of which are shared in [`notes/`](./notes). If you're interested in
taking notes, sign up for a meeting in [`agendas/`](./agendas) and indicate that
you're willing to be a note taker.

## Participation guidelines

Meetings with many participants, especially over video, can easily get hard to
follow or run off course. When we talk about issues we care about, it's easy to
get into heated debate. In order to respect everyone's time, and arrive to
worthwhile outcomes, this subcommittee follows the
["Participation guidelines" in the GraphQL Working Group](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/README.md#participation-guidelines);
a summary of which is:

- Participate
- Don't talk too much
- Volunteer to take notes
- Have an outcome in mind
- Contribute
- Choose your battles
- Champion alternatives
- Block progress as a last resort
- Be patient and persistent

## Contributing to this repo

This repository is managed by EasyCLA. Project participants must sign the free
([GraphQL Specification Membership agreement](https://preview-spec-membership.graphql.org)
before making a contribution. You only need to do this one time, and it can be
signed by
[individual contributors](http://individual-spec-membership.graphql.org/) or
their [employers](http://corporate-spec-membership.graphql.org/).

To initiate the signature process please open a PR against this repo. The
EasyCLA bot will block the merge if we still need a membership agreement from
you.

You can find
[detailed information here](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/tree/main/membership).
If you have issues, please email
[operations@graphql.org](mailto:operations@graphql.org).

### Commit access

Commit access is granted to this repo to members of the
[GraphQL TSC](./GraphQL-TSC.md) and some regular attendees of subcommittee
meetings. To request commit access, please reach out to a TSC member.
