# Composite Schemas WG - March 2025

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

### Prior meetings

Decided to go forward without reviewing due to members being up-to-date. Please
review prior recordings if you’re missing context.

### `@shareable`

- Sachin: types and fields - only applies to ones in a particular declaration
- If you extend elsewhere…
- Michael: GraphQL standpoint, never in the same spot twice
- Sachin: stipulate type `Foo`, and say you extend that type later, it’s
  repeatable
- Pascal: Not defined in the main spec?
- Michael: Correct, but in this case where it’s the same thing - need to find
  out how to merge extend types - dont have that specified yet
- Also the algo that GraphQL query exec uses
- If same directive w no args, could be same result in one
- Pascal in chat: “directive @skip(if: Boolean!) on FIELD | FRAGMENT_SPREAD |
  INLINE_FRAGMENT”
- Martijn/Sachin: defined in SDL or schema?
- Michael: This directive doesn’t end up in public schema
- Merge behavior as shown:
  ```graphql
  type Product {
    name: String! @shareable
    description: String!
  }
  extend type Product @shareable {
    name: String!
    description: String!
  }
  directive @shareable on FIELD_DEFINITION | OBJECT
  ```
- Derek: depends on implementation of GraphQL spec
- Shane: impacted ppl moving from fed1 to fed2
- Pascal: (quotes from spec, see recording)
- Pascal in chat:
  [https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/#sec-Object-Extensions](https://spec.graphql.org/October2021/#sec-Object-Extensions)
  “Any non-repeatable directives provided must not already apply to the original
  Object type.”
- Sachin: notion of type extensions goes away in fed2
- Derek: shareable stuff - shareable extension but not core stuff
- Martijn/Michael/Shane: something to keep in Composite Schemas spec?
- Shane: keep for backward compatibility
- Martijn: if ppl do SDL by hand it’s good to have bw compatibility
- Shane: does it really matter?
- Michael: has to be dealt w in validation
- Martijn: validation rules could not need to apply to SDL
- Michael: in the moment Pascal had to remove all the aspects of extends
- Up to implementor of spec?
- Pascal: could be that we spec that the first step of composition is merge all
  extensions into types
- Reason why we removed it from extensions is that it makes it confusing
- Michael: still we have to describe it - will add a note why we have this
- Outcome of this discussion is a note for the reader that we have it repeatable
  bc not that there’s value, but for schema editing reasons
- Shane: you don’t need to do that though - as long as the spec says scan a
  field, do these things - shouldn’t matter if there are one or ten
- Optimize, obv, but spec doesn’t need to care.
- Michael: at least one
- Pascal: shareable is a special thing - I don’t think this behavior is
  correct - w sharable you can’t have a non-repeatable one on an extension -
  this type extension is an extension of Product
- Martijn: not sure there’s intended behavior there - ambiguous - they’re really
  processing instructions
- Wouldn’t say we’re going against intended semantics - not according to spec,
  it’s under-specified
- Pascal: specifically for what Derek mentioned
- This means name and foo are shareable
  ```graphql
  type Product {
    name: String! @shareable
    description: String!
  }
  extend type Product @shareable {
    foo: String!
  }
  directive @shareable on FIELD_DEFINITION | OBJECT
  ```
- (more discussion of example above, see recording)
- Michael: Shareable on a type is not a thing, it should be on a field, just a
  convenience to get it on the fields
- Pascal: in your example Derek, foo would be defined on the type
- Derek: not a shareable type, just a shorthand for applying it to fields
- Pascal: we see it used often
- Shane: yes, (we see that too)
- Stephen: are we talking about the case here when we dont have an entity? Or
  does it apply if Product is an entity w keys?
- Martijn: Yes, this is regardless of entities or not
- Stephen: Do we need shareable in order to still create valid subgraphs.
- Martijn: There are a few downsides to the strict behaviour from Fed 1
  (everything shareable), this makes planning and merging more difficult. It
  forces you to have a common definition across subgraphs and all fields must
  match
- Pascal: could we make this easier like Fed 1 with marking the whole file as
  shareable?
- Stephen: Do we want to accommodate for having the same value type that have
  intentionally different definitions, or should this always be a transient
  state?
- Martijn: In Fed 1 there is no distinction between value types in entities for
  planning purposes.
- Sachin: Adding shareable increases the number of options you have to consider
  when doing planning and in Fed 1 everything was shareable making that more
  difficult.
- Marijn: In Fed 2 we actually don’t have a definition of value type anymore as
  we don;t need it
- Michael: Stephen do you want them to be autoshareable?
- Stephen: Main concern is there a way to make the schema less complex from
  composition and planning perspective as Fed 2 is more complex and has
  prevented Netflix from adopting the newer version
- Martijn: Going back to Fed 1 is probably not the answer but I agree there are
  other things we can look at maybe with satisfiability to reduce complexity

### Validation update (10m, @pascalsenn)

- [https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-spec/pull/174](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-spec/pull/174)

### required is not allowed on local fields (10m, @pascalsenn)

- What happens on nested types?
