# Composite Schemas WG - February 2025

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

## Feb 6 (Primary)

### Keys and lookups

- Keys and lookups can complement each other, but do not require each other.
- `@keys` have been removed from `@lookup` examples to prevent the concepts
  getting muddled.
- Removed text that said the directives were linked. They are not.
- In future, we might allow `@lookup` to have arguments that are not keys - for
  example `productByName(name: String!) @lookup(ignoreCasing: true)`
- Derek: this seems confusing. Keys define an entity. A lookup that returns a
  non-entity is confusing.
- Martijn: consider "products by category" with category as an enum - in which
  case, every product in the list has a category matching the argument. There
  might be valid reasons for establishing the mapping.
- In the context of this spec, separating the concepts might make sense, but we
  should call out that we expect them to be combined.
- _The second sentence in section 2.1 is confusing._
- Martijn will comment on the PR.
- The primary motivation for separating the two concepts are nested lookups.
- A `@lookup` should always have a stable output.
- An entity is something with an identity. No matter how you find it, it's the
  "same" object.
- A reason that this came up was that you might want to return productBySKU and
  extend it on another subgraph, but without making the field itself shareable.
  This means you don't need it to be a key (because keys need to be shareable).
  - If you have two different identifiers that don't match, to paths to get to a
    key, you may not have the same data.
  - e.g. metadata for a product:
    - id -> metadata
    - sku -> metadata
    - In each case you don't know the other value (id vs sku)
- Will discuss on the PR.

### Spec Structure

- We've changed section 3 to have the 5 top level topics, and it's now slightly
  less nested.
- Everything in Validate Source Schemas can be checked against a single schema.
- If you need to know all the other schemas to check if you can merge or not,
  that's Pre Merge Validation.
  - Checks the "mergeability"
- Then we merge
- Then Post Merge Validation - ensures things like that there ultimately is a
  field on the query type
