# Composite Schemas WG - January 2025

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

## Jan 9 (Primary)

### Intro

- Two topic on agenda already for satisfiability and validation spec structure
- No other topics for the meetin brought forward
- (Maybe considering auto note taker as suggestion) - David

### Review of previous progress

- Netlify has been integrated to auto-deploy previews for PRs.
- We now link to a web page for the spec which is auto published lastest
- We've added more spec test about rules and directives.
- We file issues in the spec repo about even minor issues in the spec - please
  feel free to do this yourself also!
- Directives: each have examples, description
  - @shareable now also on object types
  - @external is complete
  - (Michael shares screen) - demonstrating how keys are used in this context -
    keys and lookups
  - @external with implicit @provides in the example of “double bookkeeping”
  - If something has a key, it’s considered external automatically w/in Apollo
    Federation
  - Group asked whether it’s @shareable instead of @external
  - Kamil says it shouldn’t be @external
  - Martijn: def an exceptional situation, we assume key fields exist
  - Shane points out this might be a separate Issue
  - Derek says fed1, fed2 have different ideas
  - David: discussed w Kamil 3-4 weeks ago - my understanding of external is
    that it covers 3 separate cases
  - In v2 external w/o extension might not be resolvable
  - General agreement that this domain is not 100% clear
  - Michael recommends opening Issues w/ questions to follow up rather than
    pursuing this convo at this moment
  - Source schemas must have a unique name in the composition process.
    - How to add? Directive?
    - Needed because we refer to the schema name in overrides.
  - Benjie: override directive - my q is whether we should be using more precise
    scalars for these? Like ID or perhaps a SchemaName scalar would be better
  - Michael: we have scalars for things like that, ex: in `@is` , we could make
    use of a SchemaName scalar
  - Derek: would vote to keep custom scalars for specific syntax requirements.
    Ex: field selection map, some implied logic there, same for keys when you
    specify there, keys, overrides, it’s just a string - only available on a
    supergraph - one subgraph won’t be defining this for others, not sure it has
    value in this case
  - Michael: if it’s any string, true. If it has restraints (e.g. GraphQL type
    name), should have scalar - let’s discuss in more detail when we go into
    schema metadata discussion
- Validation: structure and rules
  - All validation rules that we have thought of/identified have been defined.
    There are likely some missing rules for edge cases that no-one has thought
    of yet.
  - Skim reviewing is still valuable! Some of the error codes might need better
    names, for example, maybe they don't make sense.
  - NOW IS THE TIME TO RENAME THINGS! Will be much more costly to do this later.
  - Whilst implementing support in HotChocolate, we discovered some bugs in the
    algorithms and there is PRs open to fix.
  - Merge algorithms don't mention "supergraph". Different classes of rules have
    access to different sets of data: just one subgraph, all the subgraphs, the
    final composed schema + details of the source graphs.
  - Benjie: text might be confusing - `arguments` variable names appear to
    collide (Pascal agrees this is a mistake)
- Validate source schema
  - Not sure what to do with this section
  - rootQuery validation could very well be, just do it for one schema, not all
  - Group seems to agree this is useful
  - Benjie: any particular reason why 3.2.1 couldn’t be 3.2, bump them up a
    level?
  - Pascal: discussed this in December - restructured it - we agree, just
    haven’t edited it yet
  - Martijn: there’s utility to having a composition group with nested steps
  - Benjie: comparing GraphQL spec w/ current Composite Schemas IA
  - Shane: in favor of a dedicated Composition chapter, with 3.x for each step
  - Kamil: we can vote on this next primary meeting on the chapter/subchapter
    structure
- Satisfiability
  - Quite complex
  - GraphQL is agnostic as to algorithms used for execution
  - This spec may differ, we could propose an algorithm
  - David: is it important for implementors to have an in-depth algorithmic
    approach?
  - Martijn: this is the purpose of the spec, to create an implementation
  - Pascal: I think it’s important to include this - we do need to talk about
    the abstract concept
  - From all fields, all combinations are possible
  - Martijn: Every path to every field of every type
  - Pascal: it’s not always clear where it breaks
  - Kamil: it would be quite complex to put on the paper - could be its own
    piece of algorithm
  - A long list of instructions would be hard to follow
  - Benjie (chat): Do you have counter examples that pass the validation
    rules/etc but aren't satisfiable?
    - Shane: That’s probably what should exist in the spec first before a full
      algo
  - David: I want to echo Kamil - the single most complex bit is the
    satisfiability algorithm. Getting it into a digestible way, covers all the
    bases, would be difficult. Considerations for perf that we don’t need to
    consider in the spec
  - This could be its own topic
  - Pascal: I think we should try - can we put it in words first? Then from
    there we can know how the technical writing may look
  - Derek: musing on how complex it needs to be
  - Martijn: difficult parts are jumping from one subgraph to another, describe
    it in generic terms, some subgraphs have requirements, interfaces, etc
