# Composite Schemas WG - February 2022

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

- Michael covers the github repo and issues, we are at stage 0 and making many
  changes
  - He covers the spec language and core principles, and shows the defined terms
    in the spec and how we are extending the GraphQL core spec
  - Open invitation to raise issues, we should agree before committing
- The term "source schema" is under discussion - get involved via the issues.
  #11
- Structure of composition has received a lot of discussion. We've worked to
  define the scope: schema composition and distributed execution.
- We need to do like the GraphQL spec: describe the fundamental execution, but
  everyone can have a better execution algorithm for it. It's important to
  understand how it works, but most advanced servers deviate from that.
  - Martijn has a nice paragraph that we might add to make this clear.
  - Space for innovation is important.
- The spec text is very much in flux, but if you don't agree with Section 1 -
  Overview, please do raise issues soon!
- Simon: is the execution algorithm outside of the normative specification, or
  do we require the observable behavior remains the same?
- Martijn: the latter; we must not specify exactly how the query plans work, but
  the observable behavior must be the same.
- Michael: I want to ensure that regular OSS devs can easily get started; e.g.
  the GraphQL Spec can be implemented directly and you get an okay result - not
  the fastest, but it works.
- We're discussing names and parameters for directives, but the set of the
  directives is quite good - it's currently a mix of the directives from Fusion
  and Federation and should cover most needs.
- Section 4 - composition has received a lot of work (and had quite a bit
  removed). It talks about validating and merging source schemas.
- Martijn: it goes beyond the GraphQL spec validation; it ensures source schemas
  are syntactically and semantically valid (e.g. that the directives reference
  sensible things)
- Shane: Do we need directives to make it work? Or is a basic GraphQL schema
  valid? Like Typescript model?
- Martijn: we're favoring explicit over implicit right now.
- Yaacov (in chat): In general composition may require transformations to avoid
  validation failure and prune the merged schema…. I would overall suggest
  calling out any transformations as separate pieces, because the main goal here
  is composition but transformations and a separate nomenclature for that might
  be useful……
- John: the schemas must be valid GraphQL schemas, but we only require
  additional data in order to interact with the other schemas
- Michael: if we want to have inference we can have a pre-processing tool that
  infers the directives, and then ties into the main implementation. We're
  specifying the core spec, how people do work on top of that is up to them.
- Jeff: regarding "core specification" - what _are_ the bounds of a common
  specification. Do we share a common understanding of what is in scope versus
  out of scope? What's going to be in the first draft versus later proposals.
- Michael: the general outline are the directives that we cover, there's no
  authn/authz/policies - those are "plus things" that we shouldn't dictate to
  everyone. The other main effort is describing the composition: how do we get
  from a couple of subgraphs to an executable composed schema. Also how does the
  execution work in terms of behavior.
- Pascal: composition and execution overlap.
- Benjie (in chat): Makes sense; e.g. helpers to build connections are common in
  GraphQL but aren't part of the spec.
- Benjie (in chat): My opinion on the spec scope: "if in doubt, leave it out"
- Martijn:
  - Composition: ensuring there's at least one possible way of getting each
    field
  - Execution: Generating an efficient way of getting each field
- Michael: "satisfiability" - ensuring the result of the merge process can be
  executed with all the different ways of getting to certain fields.
- We don't cover authz/authn/enterprise features that solutions can be put on
  top.
- Martijn: also we'll leave out all the transform directives/preprocessing like
  were in the original Fusion spec.
- Jeff: how do we decide what terms to use, how do we figure out the trade-offs
  and how to govern users? We need to keep in mind what's already running, and
  ensure people can migrate easily.
- Michael: I think with Apollo's link spec (with provides) should be possible. I
  think most of the directives we've taken from Apollo so far we've kept
  one-for-one. But the spec isn't implementable yet.
- Jeff: just want to ensure we share a common expectation of where we're going.
- Michael: I think we have a rough understanding, and there will be a lot of
  discussions on naming things. What we call things in the spec text you don't
  need to use those in marketing.
- Martijn: but of course directive names are critical for compatibility.
- Yaacov (in chat): A major transformation kind of necessary for composition is
  when an argument on a field in one subschema is actually a field in another
  subschema which may dictate execution order and cause the argument to be
  dropped in the merged schema (aka requires) / So that’s a specific
  transformation which alludes to potentially broader features
  - Reply from John (in chat): Do you have an example of what you mean? (Maybe a
    GH issue would be easier to elaborate, since chat is limited)
- Martijn: there's a lot of existing usage out there, so we must weigh the cost
  of changes against the migration costs - e.g. using the ECMAScript to model
  this.
- Pascal: seems like a good time to drop legacy concepts too.
- Michael: as Benjie mentioned in chat: there may be a preprocessing step that
  we can do to translate old schemas into new ones. If migration is difficult
  then that's something we should definitely discuss when the problems arise.
- Jeff: this seems backwards from a specification process - figuring out what is
  optimal and then making this compatible is exciting, but it might be better to
  capture what's out there and iterate from that towards an optimal solution.
- John (in chat): I agree. We should consider feasibility for migration, but
  ideally only after we come to the design we're seeking.
- Michael: I feel like that's what we've broadly done; there's things like
  `_entities` that we've not handled yet because it removes type security at
  runtime because it has an `Any` input, and it makes the schemas fundamentally
  insecure to expose. Other than this, everything else is very much aligned.
- Martijn: I agree, another difference is that there's a different syntax for
  `requires`; but we need a new way to bring in those arbitrary dynamic fields.
  Maybe we should establish a design principle of removing `_entities` and
  adding entity resolvers as a base, but changing other things would require
  more discussion.
- Pascal: definitely right to start by looking at what customers are using in
  production; great way to figure out what works and what doesn't.
- Benjie: the original reason for this WG was to capture the commonalities
  between all the different solutions and solidify that, so building off of
  production usage is the right way to do it (but attacking from both directions
  can be useful).
- Benjie (In chat, in response to the directive in Section 4- Composition):
  Maybe `@entitySource` rather than `@entityResolver` - as in "heres where you
  can get the entity from"?
- John (in chat): My hope is while we're iterating we don't unintentionally
  exclude ideas because they don't match an existing production solution. Sounds
  like everyone's on the same page there, so should be good 🙂
- Yaacov (in chat): ill try to post a discussion on the wg about what i meant
  about transformation for composition....this is apollo's example for requires:
  - ```graphql
    type Product @key(fields: "id") {
      id: ID!
      size: Int @external
      weight: Int @external
      shippingEstimate: String @requires(fields: "size weight")
    }
    ```
- Martijn: we want to describe what the composition stages are, why, and really
  explain before going on to the details - so there's a lot of content left to
  be written!
- Pascal: as you start writing algorithms, your understanding improves massively
  and that can really help you find problems in the spec - so getting more
  people involved in writing validation rules would be great.
- Michael: please read section 1; if you don't agree with something, please open
  an issue. As Martijn says, first we want to specify the idea before we write
  the algorithms around the ideas.
- **ACTION** - everyone: read Section 1: Overview - outlines design principles
