# Composite Schemas WG - September 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

## Sep 5 (Primary)

### Independent notes

* Benjie asks about the action item of "Adding additional test cases"
  * Michael clarifies this is an ongoing action item and can remain open
* Micahel discusses meeting updates
  * Defining composition rules
  * Submitted early draft of GraphQL Batching to the GraphQL over HTTP WG
  * Excited to see everyone at GraphQLConf next week
  * Group discussed naming
    * "GraphQL Federation" would be an acceptable name as decided by group
    * Michael reached out to Hasura and IBM to get input
    * Need to clarify with Lee to on the name to make sure it does not conflict with other names in the general landscape
    * David from Hasura joined today's meeting, Martijn asked how "GraphQL Federation" is used within Hasura's products
      * Used as a comment on the architectural pattern. In v3 this has been removed. David will convey the groups asks back internally. Does not expect contention but will update the group.
    * For at GraphQLConf, can we use this new name yet when talking about it?
      * Michael would not like to use the new name in the keynote, but in open discussion we could use a the general name as loosely defined.
      * We need to be careful not to upset other Foundation members with any name changes or conflicts
      * Benjie comments that the WG should continue to be called the "Composite Schemas WG" and we are working towards a spec that is yet to be named.
      * The WG in the future could also produce other specs that are not Federation so it would be good to keep that more open
    * The WG at the last meeting all agreed to the term because it is a generic name used by many vendors and companies and agreed by Apollo, ChilliCream, and The Guild
 * For GraphQLConf panel
   * The group would like to use Slido to have audience interaction (Benjie and Michael to sync later on how to set this up)
   * All questions reviewed last week, Jeff syncing with Danielle later 

### From the live notes doc:

* Moved from directives to composition process.
* Early draft of batching submitted to GraphQL-over-HTTP WG.
    * Instead of two appendices, we'll have one - how to do the two different types of batching, and how to combine them
* Naming discussed; issues with naming
    * Discussed that GraphQL Federation would be an acceptable name for us
    * Lee (and others) are concerned about releasing a spec using existing names, because we don't want to invalidate their implementations. To avoid contention, we've reached out to to get input from IBM, Hasura and other vendors.
* In the past Hasura used Federation (in v2) specifically referring to Federation compatibility.
* Hasura isn't using "GraphQL Federation" as prominently in the latest DDN work. 
* Hasura also use the more expanded concept of federation as an architectural pattern. Seems like Hasura are moving towards using different language. David will investigate within Hasura and report back
* Martijn: Can we use the term "federation" instead of "composite schemas" during the conference? We're doing a lot of content creation.
* Michael: For individual sessions it's probably fine, but keynotes probably not.
* Martijn: Could talk about it as "we're working on a federated GraphQL spec" - name to be decided
* Michael: we want to ensure we don't upset any other GraphQL Foundation member by using the name without approval.
* Martijn: if we don't get formal permission or [...]
* Michael: we're working within the composite schemas working group on a yet unnamed spec for federated GraphQL. This way we avoid calling it the "composite schemas spec" but still use the right names. When we're together in SF we should be in a better place to get all the "yes"'s.
* Martijn: Apollo supports the idea of using the term "GraphQL Federation" because it results in the least confusion.
* Michael: we took an opinion poll last week, and everyone including The Guild voted they're happy with the name. But there are a lot of vendors out there that use the term for things that the spec won't represent.
* Everything seems to be in place for the conf 
* Michael: would be great to use slido for the interactive polling/question gathering from the public


## Sep 28 (Secondary)

Lookup and batching
* **DECISION** The group decides that `@lookup` fields should not return lists, and we should add a composition validation rule that checks for a single return type
  * (Martin) This should be a validation rule, not just a note in the spec to keep "the fundamental rule of federation"
  * The return type is the thing we need to validate, args could still be lists
  * The return type of lookup probably should be nullable, is this a WARNING level validation rule?
* To do batching we should use variable and request batching and move that to be in the main spec but optional, rather than an appendix
* Look up keys should only be the keys to look up an entity
* Non-normative notes can indicate best practices like above

General notes
* We should add a new document that highlights group decisions and allows commenting with more context to have a better history than just notes
* If we use the word SHOULD in the spec, that can be a WARNING level validation rule

Source Schemas Chapter
* Michael is working on updating the current text in the repo as more people come in and looking at current text when most of it is actually in PRs today
* Lookup chapter is looking good so far
* (Martin) We should add more details to the `@key` text about the difference of multiple keys and composite keys

Resolvable = false keys
* Through discussion the team agrees that we don't need `resolveable: Boolean` as an arg to `@key` like Apollo Fed today because we have explicit `@lookup` now
* We should add text to `@lookup` explaining that a router will never enter a subgraph for an entity if there is no `@lookup`

Internal and Inaccessible
* We should have both directives for backwards compat with Apollo

Validation rules
* Tricky with enums
* (Shane had to drop early to get last notes)
