# Composite Schemas WG - June 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Host)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Host)
  - Done, we’re all introduced
- Summary of previous meetings:
  - No action items
  - [MS] Looking at `@lookup` and `@require`
  - Also introduced directive `@patch`, not sure about it, could be merged into
    `@lookup`
- Selection syntax - mapping data to inputs
- [PS] (screenshare)
- Field selection
  - (summarizes info architecture, scrolls through section)
  - Validation is the newest part
  - Combines up with an input
  - Up for review - finished today, opened PR, feel free to comment
  - You can actually have required fields that are not provided - could be that
    the output type is null and input type is non-null, which means you can’t
    use the `@lookup`
  - Spec is very explicit - have to have input object curly braces
  - PS and MW clarify a prior misunderstanding
  - Also touched on variable syntax - doesn’t make sense to put it in this
    iteration
  - Might not be needed for first version of specification
  - [MS] more about exploration - example: `context`
  - Experiments over last couple days w/ `is` was quite nice - fits well
  - Need to explore a bit more the surrounding fields - how you capture context,
    what you capture
  - [PS] a big topic - rather have something signed off that’s a bit less - can
    add later in a separate RFC
  - [MW] Thanks for doing this! Need time to review and have discussions - looks
    great
  - [DK] Action item - everyone read it through
  - [BG] I like that this is done as an appendix
  - Might be useful elsewhere - makes it easier to break out into either a new
    spec or some other form for reference in other specs
  - [MS] We do this for every scalar - every one is an appendix bc it could be
    reusable. Same thing with `@key` bc it has different semantics to it
  - Kind of a “subspec”
  - Ideally would go into scalars.graphql.org
  - [JA] TIL about that site
  - [PS] ChatGPT-generated scalars
  - [MS] This part of the spec has the furthest project
  - What we discussed the most - it’s so fundamental w/ how we build progress w/
    directives
- Directives
  - [MS] More fluid, not as specified
  - Discussing `@lookup` - consensus on naming at least
  - What I’m still working out, which is the last thing before putting meat into
    the spec text
  - Nested lookups - should allow any schema to become a subgraph to the
    specification
  - You can kind of annotate the schema
  - Also nested lookups could work nicely
  - [DK] I agree it’s a nice and interesting feature - I think we should keep
    scope small
  - Wouldn’t try to solve it in the first go
  - [MW] 2 things: namespacing case and nested keys
  - Makes sense to explore it, but potentially leave it out of the first version
  - Glad you’ve done experiments, gotten positive results
  - [MS] Given a week or two more, we could have a solution but we can always
    drop it
  - Talked a lot to ppl about this, lots of use cases
  - Benjie brought it up - lots of ppl designing APIs like that, it’s an
    opportunity that we could take
  - Also added `@patch`
  - [MW] I’m hesitant to add another directive - it’s a specialized version of
    lookup
  - [MS] It’s different - could implement resolver that if you don’t have an
    entry way, you can return `null`, which is then passed in
  - Ex: reviews subgraph, then product id, if you don’t have anything for
    product id, empty list of reviews. Doesn’t mean this item exists, could be
    that it was never created
  - `@lookup` is something that can be used from the frontend - fetch a foreign
    entity, whereas `@patch` is for other use cases, like `_entities`
  - [BG] I suggested “extend” - lookup checks that the thing exists and gives
    details, whereas patch _assumes_ it exists and then gives details
  - [MW] I’m not sure the distinction is clear-cut in all cases
  - [MS] `@patch` is not usable outside this spec, `@lookup` is useful for
    Apollo Client, Relay, etc
  - [DK] `@patch` would be “private”
  - [MS] The reason why I dislike that - internal implies other semantic
  - [MW] I’m not sure semantics are the difference maker here, … could mark it
    internal - I don’t think difference is in the existence check
  - Not necessary for a primary lookup to perform an existence check. Just has
    to match up with key fields
  - [MS] … Not knowing object exists, that’s the difference
  - [MW] multiple subgraphs may have their own definitions of existence
  - Need to continue convo with more examples
  - [KK] patch vs lookup - hide a specific field from being publicly used -
    purpose is not to hide it, it’s not to use it as a “starting point” for
    entry
  - 2 things w/ patch: (1) hide it from public usage, (2) ownership - don’t
    start w patch, start w lookup - could be two separate things. Could have
    lookup and patch; public and hidden
  - Whenever we want to resolve an entity, you have a lookup and patch, and
    expand the original entity or you have both fields hidden or publicly
    available
  - …
  - [MS] I think that is why I made two directives for now - what you said is
    that you would prefer that lookups be private by default. I think they
    should be public by default - should be usable for client frameworks to
    inspect
  - I know `@patch` should be internal by default
  - [BG, chat] @Kamil I think that `@lookup` could be public or private; but I'm
    not sure that `@patch` would ever be public?
  - [PS] product graph, reviews graph. Reviews doesn’t know Product exists. If I
    have productById which returns a product w/ review in it - not allowed to
    call this function to verify Products exist. Semantic it should be two
    completely different things. One has semantics of ownership, other has
    semantics of “I want to contribute” - different but very similar
  - [MW] Products, Reviews example is interesting. Way I think about it, way
    Federation does it, Reviews service doesn’t have to know about all Products
    as long as catalog service returns a product id - not a very clear-cut
    difference, any subgraph is able to contribute to an entity, as long as any
    subgraph returns data for that entity, it exists
  - Existence in distributed systems is often more difficult, it’s not clear-cut
    whether data for a certain entity isn’t part of a particular system means it
    doesn’t exist
  - [MS] You have a distinction in Apollo Federation - you have a good point -
    `_entities` only contributes but you cannot rely on their data that
    something exists. “I for Reviews can only say that an entity has no
    Reviews” - cannot resolve root-level data
  - [DK] You have a REST endpoint and I do `/products/123` or
    `/products/123/reviews/456` maybe you have it, maybe you don’t - something
    that is root accessible vs. something accessible through query planning.
    Still queries that can return additional data. Private and Public
  - [BG, chat]: @Martijn Walraven If client says
    `{product(id: 27) { reviews { rating } } }` and the reviews service has
    `@lookup` and looks for reviews, there aren't any, so it returns
    `{ reviews: [] }`, this implies that project 27 exists even though the
    reviews service has no data about it?
    - [PS, reply] I think it’s up to GraphQL API developers
  - [PS] I agree (w/ DK) in my example there was a `productById` field in both
    graphs
  - ק[MS] I’m not clinging to two directives, but an internal implementation.
    Can we teach it? Is it easy to explain? What is easier to explain?
  - [MW] We need to get specific with examples. We don’t have an understanding
    of use cases. Benjie gave a good example in chat
  - My first response is don’t return an empty list when you have no info,
    return `null`. But not always possible
  - [MS] In a distributed system, components are responsible for their data.
    Just have a key for their product in there. On read, just check it
  - …
  - There are certain patterns you have in examples - reviews example people
    struggled w/ when we introduced Fusion to them. Difficult to teach
  - [MW] Could be another notion that’s in hiding. An argument to lookup? A
    directive that isn’t internal that is more clear with the signal we’re
    providing here
  - [DK] For internal devs, available for supergraph but not end user, implies
    semantics
  - [PS] It’s really really nice, if you think it from a domain perspective, if
    you split the bound context of the whole application - a subgraph is a bound
    context - a product is an entity that stretches across bound context
  - If you design your subgraph properly [...]
  - You want to expose productById but only from Products service. Also exists
    in Reviews. So you’d need productById but you’d flag it as internal
  - [MW] That wouldn’t make it internal everywhere. `@inaccessible` is a
    guarantee, `@internal` is subgraph-specific
  - [MS] Then you have two semantics for making something internal
  - …
  - It’s not about functionality, in general we agree
  - It should be easy to explain - maybe you can talk - you have a lot of
    documentation at Apollo - talk that through with their Docs team - could be
    valuable input to the discussion
  - How do we teach this in an accessible way? One of our biggest struggles -
    this was not so transparent that `@internal` makes it work in this case
  - [PS] It’s a decision you make when you write a resolver - you add `@lookup`
    to it
  - [MW] I don’t think that’s what it signals
  - True of every other field you add to your subgraph by default - you hide it
    if you don’t want it to be part of the supergraph.
  - Lookup means that keyFields will match up with specified arguments
  - [PS] If we make a summary of the two approaches, of what patch actually
    does, it would make the field internal so that you do not have it on the
    supergraph if it’s only defined on the subgraph
  - [MW] reminds me of strong ownership semantics in Fed1
  - Reason it didn’t work for ppl was ownership in complex systems is spread
    out, not clear-cut
  - That’s the reason in Fed2 we’ve dropped distinction btw extends and main
    object definition
  - The way you then look at these contributes w different subgraphs is that
    every subgraph is able to contribute fields to the same conceptual entity.
    They’re _all_ contributors, there’s no single owner
  - [MS] Only subgraphs that specify an entry point (e.g. root field) are owners
  - [MW] That’s not the way I’ve thought about it before
  - … (missed about 2 minutes of notes, sorry)
  - …
  - [DK] To me it sounds like the public one, not the internal one, one of the
    fundamental properties… catalog subgraph and price subgraph - point to same
    entity. Should return same data
  - [PS] Impossible in a distributed system
  - [MW] One way of phrasing - what if you ask for a price or only a review -
    what do you expect?
  - [MS] If you ask only for reviews - only this guy or this guy to make check
  - If you expose this on both subgraphs as public - lookup could always be
    public by default
  - [MW] You could get an ambiguous result. Similar to shared fields in Apollo
    Fed
  - We ask if you mark field as `@shareable`, shouldn’t matter which subgraph.
    Up to you to ensure that’s the case according to the limitations of [your
    system]. Acceptability is the user’s responsibility - you should know what
    you’re getting into. We’d have to ask for similar guarantees for `@lookup`
  - [MS] Technically 100% true, by making both public you are stating that each
    of them can do an existence check
  - [JA, chat] Exposing an entity in a root field and the notion of ownership:
    correlation or causation?
    - And if it’s correlation, is the correlation incidental or essential?
  - …
  - [BG] My remaining concern: putting people into pit of success
  - … (end of Jeff’s notes, meeting continues)
  - If we're public by default with `@lookup` and we think that
    `@lookup @internal` is the most common use case, then I'm concerned people
    will introduce this issue. That said; addressing it only requires them to
    add `@internal` on the field and it's solved.
  - `@finder` predates federation.
  - Great way to generalise Node without using the Node ID field.
