# Composite Schemas WG - March 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Host)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Host)
- Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Host)
- Review agenda (2m, Host)
- Review prior secondary meetings (5m, Host)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — February 2024 (Week 2)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/02-Feb/08-week-2.md)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — February 2024 (Week 3)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/02-Feb/15-week-3.md)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — February 2024 (Week 4)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/02-Feb/22-week-4.md)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — February 2024 (Week 5)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/02-Feb/29-week-5.md)
  - Summary
    - [Michael] Looking into batching as a topic
    - Important to fetch data between subgraphs efficiently
    - Proposal available for a few options
      - [https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-spec/issues/25](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-spec/issues/25)
    - Variable batching is Michael/Martijn’s preference
    - Above issue goes into detail about what it solves
    - Aim: spec that doesn’t require an “entities” field (for example). Take
      every GraphQL schema as a subgraph (with directives, but cleaner); for
      that to work we need to solve batching
    - Martijn: this would be an addition to the GraphQL-over-HTTP transport.
      Hopefully a light lift, and generally useful. Hoping for widespread
      adoption. Is a barrier though.
    - Derek: with variable batching not being part of the spec, it might take a
      while?
    - Martijn: it would only be to HTTP spec.
    - Pascal: options were: fully compliant, compliant with spec but not HTTP
      spec, not compliant with anything.
    - If we can avoid needing to change the GraphQL spec itself, that should
      make it more tenable for us to do.
    - Pascal: variable batching is only required with `@require`.
    - Martijn: this would require people to expose every finder.
    - Pascal: planning should prioritise things optimised for list fetching in
      the schema, rather than variable batching (which will be a fallback).
    - Michael: have tested. Barrier to get into HTTP spec is lower than the main
      spec. Simplest implementation would be a loop around normal execution. A
      little more work in execution should result in the same kind of overhead
      as batch processing would normally entail.
    - Derek: There will still be barrier to entry for this.
    - Michael: that’s why Pascal says there must be a fallback. We’re not
      forbidding `_entities` field; the ideal is that in the future this
      batching will be enabled leading to a cleaner subgraph.
    - Pascal: alternative framing: it’s just an optimization. Implement it:
      performance benefit; don’t implement it then you get N+1 requests.
    - Benjie: Probably an appendix for GraphQL Over HTTP spec
    - As part of batching, generate one GraphQL Context - use with different
      variables
    - Assuming you run them all in parallel, should be okay
    - Fine for queries, but mutations would probably need to be serialized. Also
      what happens with subscriptions? One stream with multiplexed results?
    - Michael: mutation goes to first server, then queries, on queries you have
      requirements
    - Pascal: One subscription via SSE, another from websockets, don’t know
      which events belong to which subscription
    - Benjie: we only need queries for Composite Schemas. Mutations must not be
      batched. Same for subscriptions. So adding this to GraphQL Over HTTP spec
      would likely only apply to queries
    - Derek: mutations are useful, still applies to it but subscriptions are
      messy
    - Benjie: Michael has worked on this
    - Michael: niche, complex to implement
    - Flowing data from one request to another is not a capability we actually
      need
    - Benjie (chat):
      [https://chillicream.com/docs/hotchocolate/v13/server/batching#request-batching](https://chillicream.com/docs/hotchocolate/v13/server/batching#request-batching)
    - Derek: unique discriminator to differentiate batching for a specific
      request?
    - Martijn: variable to array
    - Michael: Benjie mentioned they should be called Variable Lists
    - Benjie: Yeah - GraphQL Over HTTP should declare what it is. `variables` is
      an object, `variablesList` is an array
    - Derek (chat): `variablesBatch`?
    - Benjie: servers might ignore `variableBatch` - might need some negotiation
    - (discussion: clarifying sending a batching payload to a server that
      doesn’t support it)
    - Michael: should we do a proposal?
    - Benjie: How are are you that this solves the problem?
    - Michael: I’d like a couple more days
    - Martijn: Might be good to have multiple implementations - graphqljs,
      apollo server
    - Derek: Use case from previous company: relying on batching, goes to
      gateway, relayed to subgraphs. Batches don’t need to be one query, just
      same subgraph. Could send two different requests?
    - Martijn: Doesn’t replace normal request batching, just another use case
    - Benjie: Could two levels of multiplexing: top-level, then in each request
      do variable multiplexing
    - Derek: could do request batching and variable batching
    - Michael: I hadn’t considered that but yeah… we should do an RFC
    - Martijn: if we do that, we might consider pointing to an old issue that
      inspired us to try this out
    - Michael: this is easy to implement, should have guidance for efficiency
    - Benjie: this was supposed to be a summary so let’s get back to the
      schedule :)
- Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Host)
  - [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - Benjie: anyone think Section 1 doesn’t reflect what we’re trying to do?
  - Items from 2022 may not longer be relevant
  - Composability rules still relevant? (All “no”s) - will close as no longer in
    scope
  - Test/rule suite for composability rules? (All “no”s) - will close as no
    longer in scope
  - Split glossary into three files? (All “no”s) - will close as no longer in
    scope
- Review Progress (10m, @michaelstaib)
  - Continued from above?
- Collaboration on a blog post? (Jeff, 5 mins)
  - Various people talking about this
  - This group is significant and it’s worth letting the community know at a
    high level what we’re doing, why we’re doing it, and what it means for the
    community
  - What sort of themes? From DM thread with Michael
    - Encourage community to get involved
    - Distributed execution solves a real pain point
    - Transformation to address microservices
    - People may feel that GraphQL is for BFF, this may indicate a change in
      that
    - Pattern is widespread in popular tools
    - Broad support from many vendors: large and small
    - Working towards a draft specification
    - Cycle back to: get involved!
  - Michael: we’re not blogging enough, so people don’t know what we’re up to.
  - Martijn: we should agree on the terminology; e.g. “distributed execution”.
    We should mention Federation / relationship with.
  - Michael: there are technical terms that the core spec uses, and we should
    derive from that.
  - Martijn: makes sense for me from the spec text; but in the blog post maybe
    “federated architecture” might make more sense
  - Pascal: agree from SEO perspective. If this is a progression in distributed
    systems, “federation” isn’t such a familiar term. “Gateways”, “distributed
    executor”, etc are terms that people are more familiar with outside of the
    GraphQL Federation ecosystem.
  - Derek: customers using the technology already want to hear “we hear you,
    we’re trying to standardize it - you have the right to choice”. New users
    need separate targeting.
  - Michael: all the GraphQL community is coming together to solve this problem
    in a standard way, this is the first blog post that we’re having. We’re not
    creating 5 different standards.
