# Composite Schemas WG - January 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Host)

- Jeff
- Laurin

## Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Host)

- https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/issues
- 1 year passed!
- Closed an everybody:review item; everything else remains

## Setup working process for spec work (20m, @michaelstaib and @martijnwalraven)

- Michael: Starts with history, a lot of discussions about composite schemas.
  The conclusion is that there is a need to have a common standard/terminology
  and progress and a composite schema spec. The goal is to set up a working
  group that meets weekly to move things forward. We already started a few
  meetings in a few weeks. \
  Things that we want to answer are “How to merge/compose schemas” and How to do
  execution across distributed graphql apis that are merged/composed. For now, the
  main-focus is mergin/. composing schemas
- Kamil: We want to align on rules for merging/composing schemas, and have
  common rules for subgraphs/schemas validation that can work for all kinds of
  implementations
- Michael: The expectation here is to not have something done in 3 months, but
  rather a year. There will be a lot of work and discussions happening.
- Martijn: we also need to decide what belongs to such a specification and what
  should not be part of the specification e.g. detailed execution formats (query
  plan), merging and validation rules, directive annotated SDL (supergraph).
- Uri: I agree that overspecifying might hurt innovation. But first, we should
  all share our knowledge and then looking at that decide how to answer what
  should be spec and what shouldn't.
- Michael: we don't need to commit to exclusion/inclusion right now, but to
  avoid binding vendors under the rules we can do what the spec does: strictly
  specify, but add clause: "ensure the observable result is the same, but do
  whatever you want"
- Michael: we currently have these meetings at 11am Central European time; if
  this doesn't work well for some people then now would be a good time to raise
  it
- Meetings are timeboxed to 1 hour, discuss a topic, agendas here, RFC folder
  here, videos will synchronize to YouTube.
- Jeff: monthly meetings are still a thing. How does one contribute the weekly
  meetings?
- Michael: smaller meetings for specific points, same as the general GraphQL
  working group
- Benjie: use the first Thursday for the primary meeting.
  - 1 meeting 4pm UTC every Thursday for 1 hour.
  - The first meeting of every month is the primary one that also summarizes the
    progress.
- General agreement on the proposed scheduled.
- Benjie: what is the difference between a local and a remote schema?
- Michael: at the start, it was only about merging types. This is more abstract.
  The community wants concrete specifications and steps how to build a gateway.
- Kamil: We are talking about 2 graphql schemas and how they can become one
- Michaell: We are not talking about transports, we talk about semantic
  merging/composing of Types in a distributed architecture.
- Michael: so far there is not that much too share from the subsequent meetings
- Kamil: should we also define focuses for the weekly meetings, so we all come
  in with the goal on working on that topic
- Benjie: That is a good idea. We should double down on the terms, that is why
  the glossary/appendix is important.
- Michael: We already started working on an appendix
- Jeff: Should already existing implementation specific things be within the
  specification
- Michael: both APollo Federation and GraphQL Fusion share the same concepts,
  share similarities but also are different on more vendor-specific solutions.
  E.g. Fusion does not reason about authentication. My goal is that we take all
  the ideas out there and from that form the best possible specification that
  combines the best concepts out of all existing solutions.
- Martijn: yeah it will be a subset of Apollo Federation and GraphQL Fusion
- John: it might make sense to pin the issue for the glossary, because it is
  important to figure out what we are talking about.
- Kamil: I can work on creating a list of all the atomic topics/proposals
  required for the specification. Then for each of those we can figure out
  whether we want to have this in the spec or not. E.g. validation per subgraph,
  composite schema (supergraph) etc.
- Michael: Martijn already started such a list.
- Martijn: yeah it is important to define all of that
- Pascal: it is really important to write it down, so we don’t forget about what
  words we use for what
- Everyone: agrees
- Benjie: I like about graphql spec that its lean and other things can be
  appendix and solved in userland.
- Michael: execution could be defined in generic way, but it is not necessary
- Benjie: anything else to discuss?
- Everyone: silence
- **ACTION** - Benjie: Setup the weekly meetings agendas
- Benjie: wrap it up
- Benjie: schedule meetings and update calendar
- **ACTION** - Benjie: Update the google calendar

---

(Jeff's notes - inadvertently taken independently of the shared doc)

- [Michael] Have been working on this process together with Martijn
- We'd like to do something similar like defer/stream, weekly meetings
- One day in the week to work together on this
- We've been doing that for a couple of weeks now, getting ideas started
- Also interested in joining meetings, being open
- Discussing what to achieve in these meetings
- Talking about composition in these meetings - approaches to type merging, etc
- [Martijn] Compared to the goals previously, they were broader - talked about
  composition in general sense
- This time, efforts are towards federated composition
- How diff subgraphs contribute to overall graph, as opposed to problems around
  merging local schemas
- Goals are narrower, that's my understanding - lmk if you agree
- [Michael] Also internally - two components - two aspects - one is composition
- One is execution. At the moment we focus on composition, explore whether
  execution is feasible
- Lots of vendor-specific things that can differentiate - exclude that for now
- Composition feels more commonly understood, execution can come later
- [Kamil] We want to align on types, rules
- Composition is a multiple step process - subgraph, supergraph
- We could take this work step-by-step
- How to split those - two stages of validation? Later, go deeper into type
  merging
- Things to discuss
- [Michael] Expectations here - this is spec work, it is not that we will have a
  spec in two weeks, three months
- Expect something well done in horizon of 12 months
- Also important to get expectations, detail work, discussions
- Have for one aspect of the spec, figure out whether it works for everyone
- [Martijn] One of the questions to know the bounds - what to put in, what to
  leave out
- You mentioned detailed execution semantics. Also open questions around other
  parts
- Supergraph format, specifics for how to specify merging rules, validation
  errors
- What is the right level of description - GraphQL Spec is abstract but still
  precise
- That's probably a good model to keep in mind
- How concrete, detailed is appropriate?
- [Uri] Overspecifying kills innovation, but sharing ideas here is helpful
- Limiting things beforehand, execution, query plan building should be in bounds
- [Michael] I agree, that's why I said focusing on composition first
- Don't have to commit now to do something, then not doing it
- In order to not bind different vendors - the same trick we do in the GraphQL
  spec
- Define an execution, as long as result is the same, do whatever you want
- Then move to the next thing, explore
- Time-wise, meetings Thursdays, had one today at 11 AM CET
- Many of you are in diff time zones, we can adjust
- Any US folks? Looking at this time as well (11 AM EST), usually 1 hour
  timeboxed
- Discuss topic, keep agenda on this repo
- [Benjie] Will happen via Foundation Zoom, which means YouTube
- [Jeff] What is the purpose of the Composite Schemas WG meeting slot? Giving
  feedback, asking Q's?
- [Michael] Yes, there could be smaller efforts as well
- [Benjie] Can I suggest that we meet weekly, but one of them being Primary?
  Simplify
- (General agreement)
- [Benjie] 16:00 UTC every week, one monthly larger group there
- Can you expand on reasons - for example - you mentioned focusing on Federated
  schema and not local
- Sounds like you want to focus on network side of things, could be diff between
  remote/local schema
- Can you clarify distinction?
- [Michael] Before, we discussed abstract topics - process for merging types
- This is a much more opinionated way of distributing a graph - an overall graph
  based on micro/domain services
- That was more abstract, what the community wants is something more clear about
  building gateways, composing subgraphs can implement tools around this
  Specification
- [Martijn] Composition tools are part of the federated use case - remote graph,
  for example
- When deciding whether a remote schema is valid
- (missed a sentence here, see recording)
- [Kamil] Schema object talking to another schema object
- Top-level stuff - supergraph
- [Michael] What we started on specifying when we started, how types are
  semantically equivalent, are merged
- There are a lot of diff concepts for how we merge types in a distributed
  architecture
- [Benjie] That is much clearer
- [Michael] On the next meeting, we can start to show more examples, couple of
  composition rules, share some work
- Not enough substance to share it
- Anyone who wants to work on that can jump on these weekly meetings
- [Kamil] Align on scope of work in next meeting?
- Decide goal: example: precisely defined composition
- Definition of two-phase validation
- So then we can align on it, going into implementation, specification, we might
  end up in a situation where we hit a conflict
- Defining scope of work
- [Benjie] Great aim for the group to resolve ahead of the February Composite
  Schemas WG
- Jeff mentioned glossary, disambiguation for this meeting
- [Michael] We started with an appendix
- [Jeff] Asked about...
- [Michael] Federation, Fusion, different ways to collaborate on a larger graph
- Fusion, Federation, have differences and similarities, mash, type shaping, not
  for core spec, that could happen in a vendor specific solution or at the
  subgraph level
- My hope is that we have a shared spec, outline why things make sense
- [Martijn] That shared spec will be a subset of Federation and Fusion, other
  implementations
- [Michael] (Talks about collaborative effort)
- [John] See the Glossary PR as well
- [Kamil] We can discuss individual items - whether to push it through spec -
  sharability by default, cross-type resolution
- Do we want to have validation by subgraph, multiple stages
- [Michael] Did a lot of discussions on that
- Can add as a separate RFC doc
- [Martijn] Would be good to have an overall structure - shared terms, different
  phases of composition
- Without necessarily going into detail for each
- [Pascal] Imporant to write these down - 2-3 week spec memory, disappears
- When we comment on PRs we have inline comments, adds good visibility into the
  reason why decisions were made
- Somehow documented
- [Benjie] Good to have a lean core
- [Michael] Query plan could be a cross-cutting concern, Grafast has a query
  plan for a monograph, more abstract
- [Benjie] Anything else to discuss?
- All aligned, good starting point
- My action item is to create relevant docs, Zooms (prob can use this one)
- Another action item is to add these meetings to the calendar - please send
  messages on Discord
