# Composite Schemas WG - November 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

## Nov 7 (Primary)

### CONTRIBUTING.md (2m, Shane)

- Shane: Wrote down pattern we’d discussed “When we’re writing the spec, we
  should follow this pattern”
- Michael: consistent examples. Just needs formatting, but looks good
- Benjie: Minor typo, but otherwise looks good. I’m in favor of anything that
  helps guide people and is centralized documentation. Thank you!
- Pascal: Add backlink to WG as well
- Benjie: Yes, and should also link to youtube playlist
- Derek: We already have that in readme. Readme should just link to contributing
- **Shane: I can take care of that (updating CONTRIBUTING.md doc)**

### Shall we change the meeting time back to 6PM CET? (5m, @michaelstaib)

- Shane and Stephen are on Pacific Time so have earliest timezone
- Stephen would prefer to shift 1hr forward
- Shane has no opinions
- Benjie: Choosing a timezone is better then UTC
- **Michael will change the configuration file for the meeting to 6pm Central
  European Timezone**

### Add Kamil and Pascal as maintainers to the spec repo. (5m, @michaelstaib)

- Pascal would like to have direct access as he meets with Michael twice a week
  and has lots of discussions so it would make it faster
- Martijn is fine making PRs for all his suggestions
- Adding maintainers will take a couple of weeks, not complicated, but does
  require updating TSC
- **We will add Martijn, Pascal, Kamil as maintainers to a new team for
  composite schemas**
- Benjie: Doing the team will grant access on both the spec and WG repo

### Review Progress (15m, @michaelstaib)

- Last few weeks we worked on merge rules
- Merging enums took 2.5 meetings!
- Empty objects also problematic. (Apollo shared their learnings and thoughts.)
- `@inaccessible` directive work is in progress, PR is open.
- How the different directives work - some are inherited to the fields, some
  affect other subgraphs; we needed to understand these consequences/rules.
- On enums: we've not got a clear solution on this so we're going with the most
  restrictive version and potentially loosen it up later. We'll use this
  approach for other features too to help with velocity.
- (We know (maybe!) that we'll change the enum rule in future.)
- Type vs field directive: likely to be a big discussion with a lot of opinions.
  An issue has been opened.
  - https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-spec/issues/57
- We've recently determined that there are categories of directives, and we need
  to specify this.

### Merge Algorithms (20m, @michaelstaib)

- [https://graphql.github.io/composite-schemas-spec/draft/#sec-Merge](https://graphql.github.io/composite-schemas-spec/draft/#sec-Merge)
- We have "pre-validation" then merge then "post-validation".
- pre-validation
  - look at subgraphs in isolation, reject certain things to prevent unnecessary
    work
- post-validation
  - look at the outcome of a merge - perhaps there are no fields left on a type
    any more?
  - how do we want to approach merging types
- how things get merged and what ends up in the supergraph schema needs a lot of
  definition - different classes of directives (e.g. metadata for composition vs
  ones that influence execution)
- Benjie (chat): Not composite schemas, but the problem of empty types is
  something I've had to think about a lot with PostGraphile, and was the
  motivation for this GraphQL.js PR:
  https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/4018
- All directives we're working on so far is just metadata for composition, it
  does not impact execution so far. (We don't have directives around
  authorization yet, though we do have those in Apollo Federation.)
- During merge, we sometimes have to reject the merge.
  - Eg If we have two of the same fields that return two different types across
    subgraphs
- Michael mis-spoke earlier: the pre-merge validation rules have access to all
  schemas, but run before the merge. If an error happens during merge then
  either it's a bug or a missing validation rule. This is important because
  merge aborts on failure, so you only discover one error at a time; but by
  enforcing validation rules beforehand we can collect all the errors together
  so we can address them all at once.
- We have `validateSourceSchema` beforehand which validates subschemas in
  isolation
- Post=merge validation ensures that the schema is "structurally valid" (though
  it isn't necessarily satisfy-able)
- If you have an interface, when do you check that the resulting object types
  all implement it correctly?
- Derek: implementations would need to be valid in subgraphs anyway
- Pascal: pre-merge rules are always complicated; you can do it pre-merge or
  post-merge. Generally pre-merge should only worry about things that are
  necessary to ensure that merge should work.
- You can implement the rules however you want, so long as the result is
  equivalent.
- E.g. the field merging algorithm in the spec is very slow, but e.g. GraphQL
  Java has a very optimized version but it produces the same errors.
- For the spec text, clarity and readability is more important than performance.
- By short-circuiting, you may miss out on errors that would have been
  surfaced - is that valid?
- Yes.
- We should recommend rather than require that it outputs all the errors.
- Error waterfalls are a possibility.
- Benjie: For these situations, we can use “should” rather than “must” in the
  spec text
- Pascal: All errors should be raised eventually, but they don’t have to raise
  at the same time
- Benjie: Errors themselves are not guaranteed, the success space is guaranteed.
  At the moment in GraphQL when you have interfaces and a field that is a
  different type there is an error, but you can’t rely on that error occurring.
- Going to change to merging PRs more rapidly due to lots of conflicts - review
  should be sent via follow-up PRs.
- Pascal: Apollo Federation has many rules that are not yet in the specification
  so this can help us see what is missing
