# Composite Schemas WG - July 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

## July 18

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Host)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Host)
  - Done, we're all introduced.
- SelectionSets still on the agenda (Pascal proposal: Appendix A: Specification
  of FieldSelectionMap Scalar)
- Pascal, another topic regarding variables, nullability, and null enforcement
  - should define a default behavior which leads to extensibility
- Attendees: David, Michael S., Derek Kamil, Shane, Martijn, Pascal
- Topic (Pascal): for SelectionSet syntax, need a way to indicate a list. From
  last time, proposing square brackets.
  - Derek: may be some confusion between a dot (.) for a scalar and its absence
    when there's an array ([])
  - Pascal: for SelectedListValue, in its definition it is limited to just one
    element
  - Pascal: will polish this some more, commit it, and then accept more
    discussion
  - Kamil: What is the need for square brackets? Michael: The idea is if you
    need to restructure the data.
  - Consensus: being explicit improves flexibility for future evolution
- Topic (Pascal): Nullability. Case of an abstract type, or union type. E.g.
  productById(Id: ID @is(field: "&lt;Movie>author.id | &lt;Movie>.id")): Product
  @lookup
  - Martijn: there seems to be a difference between @Is and @Required.
  - Martijn: There are concerns about bringing in nullability with the
    choice/selection syntax.
  - Question really is, should we specify in the specification, how this should
    be handled?
  - Martijn: We need a strong validation that guarantees the behavior. Perhaps
    we disallow the mapping of a nullable field, or, you have to affirmatively
    indicate nullability.
  - Michael S.: maybe let's not introduce more syntax
  - Kamil: The argument should not be null.
  - Michael S: we have to start on the validation rules, and they should be
    co-located with the Selection spec.

## July 11 (Primary)

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Host)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Host)
  - Done, we’re all introduced
- Proposal to add a Hasura rep to the composite schema panel at GraphQL Conf
  - Action Item: David to continue participating in the WG
- Proposal to make changes and discuss FieldSelectionMap syntax
- Action Items to review
  - none from last session
- Recap of previous meeting:
  - Michael: reviewed topic of `@lookup`
  - main issue: field selection map syntax
  - Pascal: reviewing current proposal for Appendix A: Spec of FieldSelectionMap
    Scalar
    - Most suggestions merged (typos and good points)
    - Restructured so no fixed line length.
    - Added 6.1.1 Scope section
    - Added 6.1.2 Examples section (title can change)
    - Benjie comment: Examples shouldn't have a section header.
    - Benjie comment: dimensions.{width height} maybe should be in a preproc and
      not in core spec.
    - Change: now this syntax is not just for lists but for any path (still has
      list example, but added paths example)
    - Pascal: if there is a genuine use case for addressing parent scope, then
      we can add additional syntax (e.g. variables, or a context object, or a
      $root object) later.
    - Readability for long expressions may be a concern, but could be addressed
      with triple quotes. The spec itself need not address this (Michael).
    - Benjie question about null-handling (for example) in say
      dimensions.weight. Michael: runtime is not specified at this point in this
      section. Put a pin in it.
    - Benjie question: do we want to exclude introspection types? Maybe err on
      the side of not adding them in the beginning. Michael S. proposal: use
      validation
    - Benjie question: concerns about dot (.) operator as there are other use
      cases for that operator. Proposal: bring the subject to the main WG.
    - Michael S. proposal: polish the whole package more and then bring to the
      main WG in August.
    - Pascal S. raises an issue to consider: what do we do about names of lists
      with abstract types?
    - Benjie proposal: perhaps consider square brackets for lists? (eg: [].({x
      y} | a b}) or foo.[{x y} | {a b}])
    - Martin W.: note that this might make the normal case more complicated.
    - Martin W.: Action item: take next meeting to walk through a few more
      illustrative examples for lists
