# Composite Schemas WG - April 2024

**Watch the replay:**
[Composite Schemas Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foFjxyTg6wPn4pUkZwuAk2GR)

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Host)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Host)
  - Done, we’re all introduced
- Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Host)
  - 🚀
- Review agenda (2m, Host)
  - No agenda, action items beyond prior meeting review
- Review prior secondary meetings (5m, Host)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — March 2024 (Week 2)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/03-Mar/14-week-2.md)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — March 2024 (Week 3)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/03-Mar/21-week-3.md)
  - [Composite Schemas WG — March 2024 (Week 4)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/03-Mar/28-week-4.md)
- Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Host)
  - [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/composite-schemas-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)

## Summary of previous meetings

- Michael: Initial topic: finding the right batching mechanism (#25)
- Tried request and variable batching. We've agreed on variable batching, and
  with it we can solve the batching issues between the Gateway Server/Router and
  the downstream GraphQL service.
- Not yet agreed: should the GraphQL-over-HTTP WG be involved in formalizing the
  response format. Multipart (Apollo), GraphQL-SSE (Guild, Hot Chocolate), JSONL
  (suggested by Benjie)
- Martijn: Variable and request batching can be combined.
- Michael: Still need to write up and polish the proposal, but this is what I'm
  proposing.
- Prototype implements both with all of the different response formats.
- We're not too worried about the request format, so we'll leave standardizing
  that for now - the main thing is that we can progress.
- Martijn: would be great to have one common transport that can support
  incremental delivery (stream/defer), subscriptions, batching, etc
- Michael: We've started work on test cases. We look at how they're solved in
  the different solutions: federation, fusion, composite schemas. This helps us
  understand the migration paths between solutions, and also helps to ensure
  that customer needs are solved. Helps us to understand how well the directives
  are working out.
- (Aside: `@lookup` directive is currently well-liked.)
- **[ACTION]** - everyone: Please look at the rfcs/test-cases folder in the
  composite-schemas-spec repository (and add the ones missing)
- Pascal: these have been mostly made by Michael and Kamil so far, would be
  great to have more test cases, e.g. Apollo could add some?
- Michael: I'll also be adding to the Fusion supergraph composition to show how
  we do it. We want to ensure that we don't overlook use cases.
- Michael: I'm currently working on defining the more refined definitions of the
  directives. E.g. `@entityResolver` is now called `@lookup`
- Want to make it so each of the directives have a strong definition of what
  their intended use case is, etc.
- Each directive will have a separate PR to enable feedback in a granular basis.
- Once directives are all sorted, the next logical step is composition.
- [Group]: Group does a quick verbal “OK” for `@lookup` name
- Pascal: people can still suggest changes
- Michael: no objections towards the batching.
- Benjie: On batching topic - I believe you said somewhere else that variable
  batching would be used only where there is request batching
- Michael: no, when we looked at it, actually you can put var batching in req
  batching - only thing that changes is that variables is a list of objects, not
  an object. For overall protocol, for clients we could allow both, including
  the ability to be combined
- Martijn: with current protocol [...]
- Michael: the list response for GraphQL if we have multiple results, this is
  single result, we can make a good step forward for GraphQL Over HTTP
- Benjie: if we were to make it such that batching always came through as an
  array, it would make it very easy to differentiate, or with variables we might
  need to use a different key. By requiring request batching w/ variable
  batching, that would be okay, don’t want to derail this WG too much, can be
  discussed at GraphQL Over HTTP
- Simon: Same mechanism for batching and other feature, what happens when you
  use more than one feature at same time - batch inside batch (e.g. w/ `@defer`)
- Michael: covered in doc - need to know from which request variable spawned -
  can stream within these, we know in the end from which req they were spawned,
  and from what variable - extensive prototype. You can see it in diff
  protocols - multipart, JSONL, SSE
- Pascal: the request id is nice - you can multiplex. Great for server use case
- Michael: Benjie had more of a comment on response but there IIRC we have these
  fields already to identify - works out well in these scenarios
- Shane: OK to move discussion of input format and response protocol to GraphQL
  Over HTTP - we can point out that if you support X, you can use Y, we should
  call out at runtime, fallback is to work on multiple requests - should work
  today and is called out
- Michael: yes, this is a good thing, maybe Benjie also has an idea
- Benjie: N+1 problem - GraphQL spec doesn’t even mention dataloader, it’s known
  and discussed as a solution outside the spec. We should take whatever that
  approach is
- Michael: mention as a note, or appendix
- Martijn: query plan is not part of spec - batching wouldn’t affect semantics
  of execution - can describe it as a note but it doesn’t affect how we describe
  possible execution paths - number of fetches in one req vs. separate req, same
  semantics
- Pascal: did talk about this last week, I can’t remember the counterargument
- Michael: we want to make sure whoever reads spec, could implement this from
  the transport, you are a performant subgraph
- Derek: not standard GraphQL features - prob should call out possibilities
- Benjie (chat): Saying "It's recommended that downstream services support
  batching" seems reasonable, perhaps with a non-normative note afterwards
  "Note: The GraphQL-over-HTTP specification's Appendix B covers a standardized
  request and variable batching approach for GraphQL services exposed over
  HTTP."
- Pascal: it’s an HTTP feature - accept this protocol, that protocol
- ?: It’s the request format that’s the problem
- Michael: capability check - out of our scope
- Derek: has to be some sort of external input there
- [...]
- Michael: Could be at composition time
- Martijn: Sounds like configuration information that should be in query
  planning, out of scope
- Shane: already implemented in Apollo Router - awareness of subgraph feature
  support
- Michael: also how we do it in Fusion
- Pascal: if it’s a perf optimization, shouldn’t [...]
- Michael: I think Apollo calls it flatten (Martijn nods) - there you care about
  the details
- Pascal: even this would be the same - execution of the batch would be the
  same - parallel or batch
- Benjie: subtlety - if backend server supports batching, great, if not, use one
  of the secondary methods (like N+1)
- Michael: describe that there’s a batching mechanism, sets of vars, rest is
  transport details, concerning downstream services, then we’re good at the spec
  level. Not a blocker
- Michael: let’s focus on directives for the next 2-3 weeks to get details, good
  spec text out of there
- Shane: probably not going to be general agreement by then
- Jeff: even within Apollo we’d expect lots of discussion before agreeing
- {Group} agrees to take a look, naming is hard, etc
- Benjie: good summary
- Jeff: please review blog post
- Benjie: also follow up posts, please do weigh in, more people in byline is
  better, shows broad support for Foundation
- Benjie: GraphQL Over HTTP - two things that impact this spec, request format
  for batching, and then response format for incremental delivery, subs, other
  things
- Michael: response format needs discussion - look at the ecosystem, where we
  want to go with this thing
- Benjie: GraphQL Over HTTP not currently meeting, it’s in good shape. Happy for
  this WG to play around with these things, see what conclusions we can come to.
  We don’t have to use the same thing to handle these different protocols. If
  it’s easier, that’s better. Less stuff to specify is better
- Martijn: they compose well together
- Benjie: additional concerns - certain content types involve diff security
  parameters RE: usage in the browser as well. Happy to schedule a WG in that
  group, or if we would rather do that in this WG
- Michael: the way I think, we are in agreement about broader thing here, rest
  of the work, long draft that describes a lot of things, need to find time to
  polish it up to submit to GraphQL Over HTTP. Response format could happen
  there
- Shane: RFC for SSE, Multipart, now we’re looking at adding JSONL
- Martijn: broad coalition
- Benjie: invite Denis, maintains lots of protocol libraries
- Michael: getting a good exchange will be important. More formal for spec group
